# Curated collection of open geophysics data for tutorials and documentation

This is a place to format and prepare public **open-licensed** datasets for
use in our tutorials and documentation.

We include the source code that prepares the datasets for redistribution
by filtering, standardizing, converting coordinates, compressing, etc.
The goal is to make loading the data as easy as possible (e.g., a single
call to `pandas.read_csv` or `xarray.load_dataset`).
Whenever possible, the code also downloads the original data (otherwise the
original data are included in this repository).

The curated datasets are published in a Zenodo archive:
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5167357

> **NOTE:** This collection uses [semantic version](https://semver.org/) 
> (i.e., `MAJOR.MINOR.BUGFIX` format). 
> Major releases mean that backwards incompatible changes were made to the data. 
> Minor releases add new data without changing existing files. 
> Bug fix releases fix errors in a previous release that makes the data unusable. 
> Changes to the current data files will always be published as a major release 
> unless the file(s) in the previous release was unusable/corrupted.

## Datasets

| File name | Size | Hashes |
|:----------|:-----|:-------|
| `alps-gps-velocity.csv.xz` | 0.005 Mb | `md5:195ee3d88783ce01b6190c2af89f2b14` `sha256:77f2907c2a019366e5f85de5aafcab2d0e90cc2c378171468a7705cab9938584` |
| `britain-magnetic.csv.xz` | 2.7 Mb | `md5:8dbbda02c7e74f63adc461909358f056` `sha256:4e00894c2e0fa5b9c547719c8ac08adb6e788a7074c0dae9fb1b2767cf494b38` |
| `british-columbia-lidar.csv.xz` | 4.4 Mb | `md5:354c725a95036bd8340bc14e043ece5a` `sha256:03c6f1b99374b8c00c424c788cb6956bc00ab477244bb69835d4171312714fe1` |
| `caribbean-bathymetry.csv.xz` | 7.8 Mb | `md5:a7332aa6e69c77d49d7fb54b764caa82` `sha256:9adaa2ead1cd354206235105489b511c4c46833b2e137a3eadc917243d16f09e` |
| `earth-gravity-10arcmin.nc` | 2.5 Mb | `md5:56df20e0e67e28ebe4739a2f0357c4a6` `sha256:d55134501da0d984f318c0f92e1a15a8472176ec7babde5edfdb58855190273e` |
| `earth-geoid-10arcmin.nc` | 1.3 Mb | `md5:39b97344e704eb68fa381df2eb47da0f` `sha256:e98dd544c8b4b8e5f11d1a316684dfbc2612e2860af07b946df46ed9f782a0f6` |
| `earth-topography-10arcmin.nc` | 2.7 Mb | `md5:c43b61322e03669c4313ba3d9a58028d` `sha256:e45628a3f559ec600a4003587a2b575402d22986651ee48806930aa909af4cf6` |
| `southern-africa-gravity.csv.xz` | 0.14 Mb | `md5:1dee324a14e647855366d6eb01a1ef35` `sha256:f5f8e5eb6cd97f104fbb739cf389113cbf28ca8ee003043fab720a0fa7262cac` |

### GPS velocities for the Alpine region

This is a compilation of 3D GPS velocities for the Alps.
The horizontal velocities are reference to the Eurasian frame.
All velocity components and even the position have error estimates,
which is very useful and rare to find in a lot of datasets.

* Original source: [Sánchez et al. (2018)](https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.886889)
* Original license: CC-BY

### Airborne magnetic survey of Britain

This is a digitized version of an airborne magnetic survey of Britain.
Contains British Geological Survey materials © UKRI 2021.

* Original source: [British Geological Survey](https://www.bgs.ac.uk/datasets/gb-aeromagnetic-survey/)
* Original license: Open Government Licence

### LiDAR point cloud of the Trail Islands in British Columbia, Canada

This is a point cloud sliced to the small
[Trail Islands](https://apps.gov.bc.ca/pub/bcgnws/names/21973.html) North of
Vancouver to reduce the data size.
The islands have some nice looking topography and their isolated nature creates
problems for some interpolation methods.

* Original source: [LidarBC](https://www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/data/geographic-data-services/lidarbc)
* Original license: Open Government Licence - British Columbia

### Single-beam bathymetry of the Caribbean

This dataset is a compilation of several single-beam bathymetry surveys.
The data are originally in MGD77 format and include a header with metadata on
each survey (`MGD77_921744.h77t`).
The original data file was compressed with LZMA to save space and make it
possible to upload it to this GitHub repository.

* Original source: [NOAA NCEI](https://ngdc.noaa.gov/mgg/geodas/trackline.html)
* Original license: Public domain

### Global gravity, geoid height, and topography grids

This dataset includes global 10 arc-minute resolution grids of
gravity acceleration (gravitational and centrifugal), geoid height,
and topography/bathymetry.

* Original source: [EIGEN-6C4](https://doi.org/10.5880/icgem.2015.1) (gravity
  and geoid) and [ETOPO1](https://doi.org/10.7289/V5C8276M) ice surface
  (topography) generated by the
  [ICGEM calculation service](http://icgem.gfz-potsdam.de/home)
* Original license: CC-BY (EIGEN-6C4) and public domain (ETOPO1)

### Ground gravity of Southern Africa

This is a public domain compilation of ground measurements of gravity from
Southern Africa.
The horizontal datum is not specified and heights are referenced to "sea
level", which we will interpret as the geoid (which realization is likely not
relevant since the uncertainty in the height is probably larger than geoid
model differences).
Heights were not converted to geometric since that can be done in tutorials for
better educational purposes.

* Original source:[NOAA NCEI](https://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/)
* Original license: Public domain

## Requirements for included datasets

All source datasets must:

1. Be either in the public domain or distributed under a permissive licence
   (e.g. CC-BY but not CC-BY-NC).
1. Represent a common real-world application.
1. Contain interesting features that lead to teachable moments for tutorials
   (e.g., interesting anomalies easily associated with geology, large gaps in
   bathymetry lead to interesting interpolation issues, etc).

The output datasets should:

1. Contain standard and descriptive variable names ("longitude" instead of
   "LON", "gravity_disturbance_mgal" instead of "FAA")
1. Include associated metadata (datum, license, source, etc.) if supported
   by the format (e.g. netCDF following CF conventions, but not CSV).
3. Specify units through appropriate metadata (CF conventions in netCDF or
   column names in CSV, like `gravity_disturbance_mgal`). Exceptions are
   longitude and latitude coordinates which are always in decimal degrees.
1. Be under 10 Mb in size, if possible. This is to keep downloads quick,
   particularly when building documentation on CI. Use compression when
   appropriate and only if it doesn't add extra and difficult to install
   dependencies.

## License

All Python source code is made available under the BSD 3-clause license. You
can freely use and modify the code, without warranty, so long as you provide
attribution to the authors.

Unless otherwise specified, all data files and figures created by the code are
available under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License (CC-BY).
The licenses for the original source data are specified in this `README.md`
file and the Jupyter notebooks.
